docs: :building_construction: explain the URN ID and why we need it (#50)
seedcase-project/zen-do: docs/design/interface/inputs.qmd

similar metadata is contained in those other formats.
:::

### Unique ID between metadata and deposit

The functionality of zen-do depends on being able to determine
whether a given metadata file has a corresponding Zenodo deposit on their
servers or not. This is only possible if one local metadata file is clearly
and unambiguously connected to one Zenodo deposit on the server.

While Zenodo will create a unique deposit ID once a deposit has been
created, that means that the user (or us) would have to create the
deposit first and then add the deposit ID to the metadata file. This is
not how we want zen-do to behave.

So instead of using the ID created by Zenodo, we define our own ID and
list it in the `related_identifiers` of the metadata. We do not use the
repository URL as the ID because we want to be able to create multiple
deposits for the same repository, e.g., one for the source code and one
for the documentation.

So, given the way Zenodo works and how we want zen-do to be used, we
need some way to uniquely identify the metadata to accurately determine

> whether a deposit exists or not. We decided on using a URN ID that looks

Author: ```suggestion
for the documentation. We decided on using a URN ID that looks
```

similar metadata is contained in those other formats.
:::

### Unique ID between metadata and deposit

> The way we envision how we use zen-do depends on being able to determine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The functionality of zen-do depends on being able to determine
```

> whether a given metadata file has an existing Zenodo deposit on their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whether a given metadata file has a corresponding Zenodo deposit on their
```

servers or not. However, if a metadata file doesn't have a connected
Zenodo deposit on their servers, there is no way for Zenodo (or us) to

> uniquely determine whether a deposit exists or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
servers or not. This is only possible if one local metadata file is clearly
and unambiguously connected to one Zenodo deposit on the server.
```

If you meant this

While Zenodo will create a unique deposit ID once a deposit has been
created, that means that the user (or us) would have to create the
deposit first and then add the deposit ID to the metadata file. This is
not how we want zen-do to behave.

Likewise, without a unique identifier, we would have to compare the
contents of the metadata file with all the metadata contents from each
deposit returned from Zenodo. We couldn't rely on searching for an

> identifier within `related_identifiers` using, for example, the GitHub

Author: ```suggestion
typical and usual identifier within `related_identifiers` using, for example, the GitHub
```

@martonvago does that help?

Reviewer: How about the suggestion below?

repository URL or something similar identifier because we also want to
be able to create multiple deposits for the same repository, e.g. one

> for the source code and one for the documentation.

Reviewer: This is a bit misleading because we do actually "rely on searching for an identifier within `related_identifiers`", it's just not the repo URL (for the reasons you say).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So instead of using the ID created by Zenodo, we define our own ID and
list it in the `related_identifiers` of the metadata. We do not use the
repository URL as the ID because we want to be able to create multiple
deposits for the same repository, e.g., one for the source code and one
for the documentation.
```

And then you can cut the first sentence of the next paragraph if you want.

So, given the way Zenodo works and how we want zen-do to be used, we
need some way to uniquely identify the metadata to accurately determine
whether a deposit exists or not. We decided on using a URN ID that looks
like:

```text

> urn:zenodo:<unique-id>:<optional-sub-id>

Reviewer: I like it!

```

The only required parts are the `urn:zenodo` prefix and the

> `<unique-id>`. But if the user wanted to have multiple deposits for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`<unique-id>`. But if the user wants to have multiple deposits for the
```
(or align the other clause)

same `<unique-id>`, they should use the optional `<optional-sub-id>` to
distinguish between those outputs. If the metadata file is hosted on a
GitHub repository, we recommend:

```text
urn:zenodo:<github-username>:<repo-name>:<output-type>
```

So if we made a metadata file for the zen-do repository to upload the
documentation as a PDF as a deposit, it might look like
`urn:zenodo:seedcase-project:zen-do:docs`. If we wanted to make a
deposit for the same repository but for the source code instead, it
might look like `urn:zenodo:seedcase-project:zen-do:source`. The final
`<output_type>` part is used to distinguish between different types of

> deposits for the same repository and are arbitrary and up to the user to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deposits for the same repository and is arbitrary and up to the user to
```
